Transaction and execution doc (#44)
substrate-developer-hub/docs-sandbox: source/docs/main-docs/02-fundamentals/transaction-format.md

The SCALE encoded data is then signed (i.e. (`call`, `extra`, `additional`)) and the signature, extra data and call data is attached in the correct order and SCALE encoded, ready to send off to a node that will verify the signed payload.
If the payload to be signed is longer than 256 bytes, it is hashed just prior to being signed, to ensure that the size of the signed data does not grow beyond a certain size.

This process can be broken down into the following steps:

1. Construct the unsigned payload.
1. Create a signing payload.
1. Sign the payload.
1. Serialize the signed payload.
1. Submit the serialized transaction.

An extrinsic is encoded into the following sequence of bytes just prior to being hex encoded:

`[ 1 ] + [ 2 ] + [ 3 ] + [ 4 ]`

where:

- `[1]` contains the compact encoded length in bytes of all of the following data. Learn how compact encoding works using [SCALE](). 
- `[2]` is a `u8` containing 1 byte to indicate whether the transaction is signed or unsigned (1 bit), and the encoded transaction version ID (7 bits).

> - `[4]` if a signature is present, this field contains an account ID, an SR25519 signature and some extra data. If unsigned this field contains 0 bytes.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[3]` if a signature is present, this field contains an account ID, an SR25519 signature and some extra data. If unsigned this field contains 0 bytes.
```

_This article describes in detail what the format of an extrinsic (in particular signed and unsigned transactions) looks like in Substrate._
_This is particularly useful for understanding how the transaction pool checks incoming tranactions._
_Parachain builders will find this useful for customizing how their transactions are formatted as well as writing client applications that need to adhere to a chosen format._

> The way the format of an extrinsic is desgined in Substrate takes into account the metadata it should expose as well as any additional information required to verify that a transaction is valid.

Author: ```suggestion
Extrinsics normally contain a signature, some data to describe if the extrinsic has passed some validity checks and a reference to the pallet and call that it is intended for.
```

> This provides a means of checking the requirements for an extrinisic to be valid and correctly constructed, which is done in the runtime by formatting any extrinsic as either unchecked, checked or opaque. 

Author: ```suggestion
This format provides a way for applications to ensure the requirements for an extrinisic are met and correctly constructed. 
```

  - The spec version and the transaction version. 
  This ensures the transation is being submitted to a compatible runtime.
  - The genesis hash. This ensures that the transaction is valid for the correct chain.
  - The block hash. This corresponds to the hash of the checkpoint block, which enables the signature to verify that the transaction doesn't execute on the wrong fork, by checking against the block number provided by the era information.

The SCALE encoded data is then signed (i.e. (`call`, `extra`, `additional`)) and the signature, extra data and call data is attached in the correct order and SCALE encoded, ready to send off to a node that will verify the signed payload.
If the payload to be signed is longer than 256 bytes, it is hashed just prior to being signed, to ensure that the size of the signed data does not grow beyond a certain size.

This process can be broken down into the following steps:

1. Construct the unsigned payload.
1. Create a signing payload.
1. Sign the payload.
1. Serialize the signed payload.
1. Submit the serialized transaction.

An extrinsic is encoded into the following sequence of bytes just prior to being hex encoded:

> `[ 1 ] + [ 2 ] + [ 3 ] + [ 4 ] + [ 5 ]`

Author: ```suggestion
`[ 1 ] + [ 2 ] + [ 3 ] + [ 4 ]`
```

where:

- `[1]` contains the compact encoded length in bytes of all of the following data. Learn how compact encoding works using [SCALE](). 
- `[2]` is a `u8` containing 1 byte to indicate whether the transaction is signed or unsigned (1 bit), and the encoded transaction version ID (7 bits).
- `[3]` is a `u8` containing 1 bit to indicate whether the transacton is signed.

> - `[4]` is a `[u8; 32]` containing the signature, if signed. If unsigned this is just a `0; u8`.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[3]` is a `[u8; 32]` containing the signature, if signed. If unsigned this is just a `0; u8`.
```

> - `[5]` is the encoded call data. This comprises of 1 byte denoting the pallet to call into, 1 byte denoting the call to make in that pallet, and then as many bytes as needed to encode the arguments expected by that call.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[4]` is the encoded call data. This comprises of 1 byte denoting the pallet to call into, 1 byte denoting the call to make in that pallet, and then as many bytes as needed to encode the arguments expected by that call.
```

_This article describes in detail what the format of an extrinsic (in particular signed and unsigned transactions) looks like in Substrate._
_This is particularly useful for understanding how the transaction pool checks incoming tranactions._
_Parachain builders will find this useful for customizing how their transactions are formatted as well as writing client applications that need to adhere to a chosen format._

> The way the format of an extrinsic is desgined in Substrate takes into account the metadata it should expose as well as any additional information required to verify that a transaction is valid.

Reviewer: I'm not really clear on what "takes into account the metadata it should expose" means?

I'd probably say something more along the lines of "An extrinsic normally contains a signature, a few extraparameters which usually help describe when the extrinsic is valid, a reference to the pallet and call that it is intended for, and any parameters required by that call. The signature and extra parameters are optional."

> The way the format of an extrinsic is desgined in Substrate takes into account the metadata it should expose as well as any additional information required to verify that a transaction is valid.

Author: ```suggestion
An extrinsic normally contains a signature; some extra data which usually helps to describe when the extrinsic is valid; a reference to the pallet and call that it is intended for; and any parameters required by that call. The signature and extra parameters an extrinsic can hold are optional.
```

This provides a means of checking the requirements for an extrinisic to be valid and correctly constructed, which is done in the runtime by formatting any extrinsic as either unchecked, checked or opaque. 

- Unchecked: signed transactions that require some validation check before they can be accepted in the transaction pool.

> Any unchecked extrinsic contains the signature for the data being sent plus some extra data.

Reviewer: If I was going with my sentence above I'd say "Any unchecked extrinsic contains the signature for the data being send plus the extra parameters."

- Checked: inherent extrinsics which by definition don't require signature verification. 
Instead, they carry information on where the extrinsic comes from and some extra data.
- Opaque: used for cases when an extrinsic hasn't yet been committed to a format but can still be decoded. 

Extra data can be any additional information that would be useful to attach to a transaction or inherent.

> For example, the nonce of the transaction, or the tip for the block author.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the nonce of the transaction, the tip for the block author, or how long the extrinsic is valid for.
```

(just to add another example)

This information is provided by a [specialized extensions](#signed-extensions) that help determine the validity and ordering of extrinsics before they get included in a block.

> A signed transaction call could look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A signed transaction might be constructed like so:
```

```rust
node_runtime::UncheckedExtrinsic::new_signed(
		function.clone(),                                      // some call
		sp_runtime::AccountId32::from(sender.public()).into(), // some sending account
		node_runtime::Signature::Sr25519(signature.clone()),   // the account's signature
		extra.clone(),                                         // the signed extensions 
	)
```

## How transactions are constructed 

Substrate defines its transaction formats generically to allow developers to implement custom ways to define valid transactions. 
In a runtime built with FRAME however (assuming transaction version 4), a transaction must be constructed by submitting the following encoded data:

`<signing account ID> + <signature> + <additional data>`

When submitting a signed transaction, the signature is constructed by signing:

- The actual call, composed of:
  - The index of the pallet.
  - The index of the function call in the pallet. 

>   - The address and balance of the sender. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The parametered required by the function call being targeted
```

The address and balance is only in the specific case of the Balances.transfer call.

  
- Some extra information, verified by the signed extensions of the transaction:
  - What's the era for this transaction, i.e. how long should this call last in the transaction pool before it gets discarded?

>   This can either be `Mortal` or `Immortal`.

Reviewer: If `Mortal`, also provided are "phase" and "period" values which I don't understand well enough to be precise here, but afaiu basically define which block number the extrinsic is first valid and which block number the extrinsic ceases to be valid.

>   This can either be `Mortal` or `Immortal`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - The nonce, i.e. many prior transactions have occurred from this account?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The nonce, i.e. how many prior transactions have occurred from this account?
```

  This helps protect against replay attacks or accidental double-submissions.
  - The tip amount paid to the block producer to help incentive it to include this transaction in the block.

Then, some additional data that's not part of what gets signed is required, which includes:

  - The spec version and the transaction version. 
  This ensures the transation is being submitted to a compatible runtime.
  - The genesis hash. This ensures that the transaction is valid for the correct chain.
  - The block hash. This corresponds to the hash of the checkpoint block, which enables the signature to verify that the transaction doesn't execute on the wrong fork, by checking against the block number provided by the era information.

The SCALE encoded data is then signed (i.e. (`call`, `extra`, `additional`)) and the signature, extra data and call data is attached in the correct order and SCALE encoded, ready to send off to a node that will verify the signed payload.

> In order to minimize the size of the signed transaction if a payload is longer than 256 bytes, it gets hashed and the hashed value is what gets signed and serialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the payload to be signed is longer than 256 bytes, it is hashed just prior to being signed.
```

"minimize the size of the signed transaction" would confuse me; it implies that we are reducing the size of the transaction that is sent over the wire, but we are not; we are ensuring that the size of the data that we're about to sign does not grow beyond a certain size. What we end up sending down the wire is always identical in length regardless of how big or small this signed payload is.

This process can be broken down into the following steps:

1. Construct the unsigned payload.
1. Create a signing payload.
1. Sign the payload.
1. Serialize the signed payload.
1. Submit the serialized transaction.

> The final result has the following bit-fields:
> 
> `0x + [ 1 ] + [ 2 ] + [ 3 ] + [ 4 ] + [ 5 ]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An extrinsic is encoded into the following sequence of bytes just prior to being SCALE encoded and then hex encoded:

`[ 1 ] + [ 2 ] + [ 3 ] + [ 4 ] + [ 5 ]`
```

Reviewer: Also note here; we don't know much about what `[5]` will contain, but we do at least know that we'll have 1 byte to point to the pallet, and 1 byte to point to the call within that pallet, so it may be worth talking about that here (but happy if that was descibed in the details for `[5]` below too :)

where:

> - `[1]` is a `u8` containing the compact encoded length of the encoded data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `[1]` is a `u8` containing the compact encoded length in bytes of all of the following data.
```

> - `[2]` is a `u8` containing 1 byte for the transaction version ID.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[2]` is a `u8` containing 1 byte to indicate whether the transaction is signed or unsigned (1 bit), and the encoded transaction version ID (7 bits).
```

> - `[2]` is a `u8` containing 1 byte for the transaction version ID.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[2]` holds one byte where the first bit is 0 if the extrinsic is _unsigned_ and 1 if it is _signed_. The remaining 7 bits encode the transaction version ID, which currently is 4 for the extrinsics this document is describing. 
```

> - `[3]` is a `u8` containing 1 bit to indicate whether the transacton is signed.

Reviewer: There is exactly 1 byte for both [2] and [3] here; the first _bit_ is 0 if unsigned, 1 if signed. The remaining 7 bits encode a version number (which we expect to be equal to the decimal 4 for the encoding described here).

> - `[3]` is a `u8` containing 1 bit to indicate whether the transacton is signed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - `[4]` is a `[u8; 32]` containing the signature, if signed. If unsigned this is just a `0; u8`.

Reviewer: This isn't correct. If the signature is present, then we have first an account ID (which I think is typically 33 bytes, but can vary), then an SR25519 signature (65 bytes I think by the looks of it), then some extra data (which can vary based on the runtime, but is typically the Era (moral or immortal), nonce (compact encoded, so variable number of bytes) and tip (also compact encoded variable number of bytes).

And if the signature isn't present, 0 bytes.

> - `[4]` is a `[u8; 32]` containing the signature, if signed. If unsigned this is just a `0; u8`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - `[4]` is a `[u8; 32]` containing the signature, if signed. If unsigned this is just a `0; u8`.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[4]` if a signature is present, this field contains an account ID, an SR25519 signature and some extra data. If unsigned this field contains 0 bytes.
```

- `[5]` is a `u128` containing the encoded call data.

The way applications know how to construct a transaction correctly is provided by the [metadata interface](./frontend#metadata).

> For instance, an application will know that a `(u8, u8, u8, [u8; 32], u128)` type will encode to the correct bytes to represent the call it wants to make. 

Author: ```suggestion
An application will know how to correctly encode a transaction by using the metadata types and transaction format.
```

> If a call doesn't need to be signed, the application knows to pre-prend a `None` signature to it (`0; u8`). 

Reviewer: Note that the example `(u8, u8, u8, [u8; 32], u128)` is not right (see above).

"Prepending a `None`" is confusing IMO; the signature isn't actually at the start of the transaction (the length comes first.. which I always forget about!), but also the SCALE encoded length of `None` is still 1 byte. 

If a call doesn't need to be signed, then the first bit in `[2]` will be 0 and so we'll know not to try decoding a signature.

> If a call doesn't need to be signed, the application knows to pre-prend a `None` signature to it (`0; u8`). 

Author: ```suggestion
If a call doesn't need to be signed, then the first bit in [2] will be 0 and so an application will know not to try decoding a signature.
```

<!-- TODO: How are inherents constructed? -->

**Example:**

Balances transfer from Bob to Dave: Bob sends `42` units to Dave.

[ TODO: polkadotjs apps screenshot ]

* Encoded call data: `0x050000306721211d5404bd9da88e0204360a1a9ab8b87c66c1bc2fcdd37f3c2222cc20a8`
* Encoded call hash: `0x52f197be55b1fcd3bd866f19aab6da02a18fd4ee034292e8c9c3b245939eda71`
* Signed call: `0xf4c7bf707e5fee3e7d9938c4a0b27fabf72fa7c1c154cacb02cb74bd1874d219e57a15856884545f0e4c59d79184eb238272a9aab0a03c13edc65774f0a8ce88`

> * Compact endcoded length of encoded data: `4a`

Author: ```suggestion
* Compact endcoded length of encoded data: `2d02`
```

> * Resulting extrinsic: `0x4a100f4c7bf707e5fee3e7d9938c4a0b27fabf72fa7c1c154cacb02cb74bd1874d219e57a15856884545f0e4c59d79184eb238272a9aab0a03c13edc65774f0a8ce8852f197be55b1fcd3bd866f19aab6da02a18fd4ee034292e8c9c3b245939eda71`

Reviewer: The call data and hash look right, but the signed call is not right (you'd expect to see the exact same hex for the call data at the end of the hex for the signed call data, since the only difference is the signature info and such up front.

Something like:

```
0x2d028400cebf28ce763780c72973e16ddb0b86c33f8868d37ef0eb95691b416f838e7e6201a05bdb6cdfaf0a7fa47b73eace5f3ad03d3395544210fb10a2c3d31865d4db587f45b71b185059411dd95c28943842748035bf089e553b1e5869d2bf599eaa82d5030000050000306721211d5404bd9da88e0204360a1a9ab8b87c66c1bc2fcdd37f3c2222cc20a8
```

Would be an actual signed extrinsic that is the correct shape. the 2d02 compact decodes to the integer 139, which is equal to the length of the rest (278 hex characters / 2 = number of bytes)

> * Resulting extrinsic: `0x4a100f4c7bf707e5fee3e7d9938c4a0b27fabf72fa7c1c154cacb02cb74bd1874d219e57a15856884545f0e4c59d79184eb238272a9aab0a03c13edc65774f0a8ce8852f197be55b1fcd3bd866f19aab6da02a18fd4ee034292e8c9c3b245939eda71`

Author: ```suggestion
* Resulting extrinsic: `0x2d028400cebf28ce763780c72973e16ddb0b86c33f8868d37ef0eb95691b416f838e7e6201a05bdb6cdfaf0a7fa47b73eace5f3ad03d3395544210fb10a2c3d31865d4db587f45b71b185059411dd95c28943842748035bf089e553b1e5869d2bf599eaa82d5030000050000306721211d5404bd9da88e0204360a1a9ab8b87c66c1bc2fcdd37f3c2222cc20a8`
```

> * Resulting extrinsic: `0x4a100f4c7bf707e5fee3e7d9938c4a0b27fabf72fa7c1c154cacb02cb74bd1874d219e57a15856884545f0e4c59d79184eb238272a9aab0a03c13edc65774f0a8ce8852f197be55b1fcd3bd866f19aab6da02a18fd4ee034292e8c9c3b245939eda71`

Author: ```suggestion
* Resulting extrinsic: `0x2d028400cebf28ce763780c72973e16ddb0b86c33f8868d37ef0eb95691b416f838e7e6201a05bdb6cdfaf0a7fa47b73eace5f3ad03d3395544210fb10a2c3d31865d4db587f45b71b185059411dd95c28943842748035bf089e553b1e5869d2bf599eaa82d5030000050000306721211d5404bd9da88e0204360a1a9ab8b87c66c1bc2fcdd37f3c2222cc20a8`
```

> Submitting the resulting constructed extrinsic via RPC returns:

Reviewer: Where specifically does the below come from? If you submit via eg author_submitExtrinsic all you get back is an extrinsic hash iirc.

> Submitting the resulting constructed extrinsic via RPC returns:

Author: ```suggestion
Submitting the resulting constructed extrinsic via RPC returns this metadata:
```

```json
{
  dispatchInfo: {
    weight: 195,952,000
    class: Normal
    paysFee: Yes
  }
  events: [
    {
      phase: {
        ApplyExtrinsic: 1
      }
      event: {
        method: Withdraw
        section: balances
        index: 0x0508
        data: [
          5FHneW46xGXgs5mUiveU4sbTyGBzmstUspZC92UhjJM694ty
          125,000,141
        ]
      }
      topics: []
    }
    {
      phase: {
        ApplyExtrinsic: 1
      }
      event: {
        method: Transfer
        section: balances
        index: 0x0502
        data: [
          5FHneW46xGXgs5mUiveU4sbTyGBzmstUspZC92UhjJM694ty
          5DAAnrj7VHTznn2AWBemMuyBwZWs6FNFjdyVXUeYum3PTXFy
          42
        ]
      }
      topics: []
    }
    {
      phase: {
        ApplyExtrinsic: 1
      }
      event: {
        method: ExtrinsicSuccess
        section: system
        index: 0x0000
        data: [
          {
            weight: 195,952,000
            class: Normal
            paysFee: Yes
          }
        ]
      }
      topics: []
    }
  ]
  status: {
    InBlock: 0x6543a4d4b44f5acc9ad111f0218296f1da5a5493599431ce9eecb55ed0a4d3fb
  }
}
```

## Signed extensions

> Substrate provides the concept of **signed extensions** to extend an extrinsic with additional data, provided by the [`SignedExtension`](/rustdocs/latest/sp_runtime/traits/trait.SignedExtension.html) trait.

Reviewer: Might be worth relating this back to being what the "extra data" is in the above paragraphs
